[Music]
uh well thank you very much Dom and
Angela for organizing this and inviting
me here to have this opportunity to give
you guys a an update on some of the
things we're doing in our attempt to
manage
cancer um and I'll be talking uh about
some fundamentals uh of the disease
and then I'll give you an update on some
of our unpublished work with mice uh and
with people um so let me uh go to the
okay this is um we always have a reality
check an update what's going on in the
world of cancer um we have the latest
that just came out projections for 2016
I don't expect you to see the details of
these numbers I only want you to know
they're big and they're getting bigger
all right so we have the 2016 we have
1,632 people a day dying from cancer
we're not really sure how many of these
people are dying from the cancer or from
the treatments that they used to treat
the disease this is a a very difficult
question and we also recognize now uh
that uh brain cancer in children
pediatric brain cancer has replaced
leukemia as the number one killer a
cancer killer for children so this
situation is not good and something has
to be done
so we have a question um and this is a
provocative question uh that needs to be
addressed in relationship to the origin
of the disease I think if we better
understand the origin of the disease we
will have a better chance at managing uh
and preventing the disease all right so
is cancer a nuclear genetic disease or
is it a mitochondrial metabolic disease
the question is weighted okay is the
disease resulting from defects in the
nucleus of the cell or is it resulting
from defects in the cytoplasm and in
particular the mitochondria that we've
heard a lot about at this meeting of the
cell this is a very important question
because it will determine how we
approach this disease with but with
respect to not only management with but
with respect to
prevention all right the current Dogma
cancer is a genetic disease and the
Hallmarks of cancer by dos Hanahan and
ber have solidified this over two uh
major papers in 2000 and 2001 some of
the most highly cited papers in the
field of cancer um cancer cells carry
the oncogenic and tumor suppressor
mutations that Define cancer as a
genetic disease a
Dogma is an irrefutable truth it's a
concept that is no longer challenged or
investigated because a Dogma is
solid and how do I know this is a Dogma
how do we know that it's a dog Dogma
when we teach General biology cell
biology and biochemistry at the college
level and you look at the sections on
cancer cancer is a genetic disease
there's no other discussion about it you
go to the NCI website cancer is a
genetic disease there's no discussion
about this this is a
Dogma now they Here's the the the the
foundation of the Dogma is the somatic
mutation Theory and that solidifies the
dogma and they use these simplistic
diagrams a car that has no brakes and
the accelerator is is maximally forward
to replicate or to simulate what goes on
in a population of cancer cells here
these cells are out of control cell
division out of control they have no
brakes and their acceleration their
growth acceleration is out of control
and you have this uh situation so ATAC
control cell growth disregulated cell
growth is the signature feature of this
dis disease regardless of what tissue or
organ it happens to attack then we place
the Hallmarks of the disease as hannahan
and Weinberg have done in this these six
major Hallmarks sustaining proliferation
evading growth activating Invasion and
metastasis enabling replicative
immortality inducing angiogenesis and
resisting cell death all the result of
nuclear-driven enco genes and tumor
suppressor
genes now in the most recent addition of
their paper we we now entered in two
emerging Hallmarks Hallmarks that have
not yet reached the big six so this
includes disregulated cellular
energetics and avoiding immune uh
destruction in if you read their paper
in in detail it will it will say this
regulated energetics is now considered
an emerging Hallmark that is programmed
by proliferating inducing ancoin
preserving the Dogma
okay this preserves the Dogma because
we're saying okay you can have this
disregulated energy metabolism but the
enog are controlling it everybody's
happy all
right now we have here's another
situation normal chromosomes normal cell
now all of a sudden cancer arises from a
series of uh chance mutations in
different genes in different places and
they say maybe for we nobody really
knows how many genes are responsible for
the origin of the disease some people
say one two four uh Michael Stratton in
his group uh predict that complete
cancer genome in Sequel will eventually
identify 700 million mutations all right
several several all these driver genes
and passenger genes and all this kind of
stuff and they now they're calling in uh
Watson right the IBM computer down at MD
Anderson they try to figure out what's
going on with all these genes good luck
to that all right now here we have a
person staring into a screen
individual's cancer cells are
genetically tested for personalized
therapy she's going to look at these
images and breast cancer cells being
examined to see if they possess extra
copies of a particular Gene and based on
that genetic information they're going
to either make some sort of a prognosis
or they're going to elicit some sort of
a therapy and we know from President
Obama's speech a couple of weeks ago and
he emphasized in his State of the Union
speech personalized therapy is the way
we're going to manage this disease and
we're going to have the honoral Joe Joe
Biden lead the
charge now I believe Joe Biden has a
good heart and I think because the loss
of his son the gleo blastoma he has an
intrinsic interest to do something about
managing cancer the question is is he
going to receive the information related
to the Dogma or maybe he might want to
consider other options or other uh
possibilities and this is what we don't
yet know now one of the most important
things about cancer is metastasis this
is what ultimately kills almost all the
people that have the disease either the
either that process itself or in the
attempts to stop that
process this is a diagram here you have
the cancer cells and they go through
this Cas Cascade it's a it's a very
stereotypical Cascade regardless of
where the cancer comes from if it comes
from the lung the colon the breast you
know the bladder it goes through the
cancer cells invade okay these green
cells are the they break through the
basement membrane and enter into into
the local tissue then they intravasate
enter into the circulation these are
very sophisticated biological processes
by which this happens they uh immune
system survival okay how come they're
surviving the immune system isn't it
we'll come to that later on but then
they immunosuppress the immune system
and they extravasate they leave the
bloodstream and and and enter and form
these col distant colonizations which
means that you can't cut this out
they're spreading all over the place so
it becomes a very ult disease but this
is a very stereotypical
pattern now according to the Dogma the
epithelial meenal transition is designed
to explain this chance mutations happen
in these cells the the cells through
these chance mutations enter into the
bloodstream and then many of these
effects of the chance mutations become
reversed in some unknown way and then
they start uh replicating uh the way
they were before they were actually
entering into the
bloodstream now I don't know how a bunch
of chance mutations could constantly
produce a very St stereotypical pattern
how do chance events cause a non- chance
event I don't
know now we have a
problem how can we advance new metabolic
therapies if the 800 pound gorilla
thinks cancer is a genetic
disease and who is the gorilla the
National Cancer Institute academic and
pharmaceutical cancer Industries
all right Dogma
rules if you want to come up with a new
therapy you better make sure it's It's
associated with Dogma now we can say we
don't need to do that and we can putts
around here with these metabolic
therapies but they'll always be on the
periphery they're not going to be
mainstream until the gorilla un asses
the
room now how are you going to do that
all right you can just do it by
continuing to do what many people in
this room are doing or you can try to
undermine the Dogma with the evidence
that exists and this is what I'm trying
to do through the scientific argument
the scientific argument and the debate
related to this disease so let's look at
the ele the evidence that challenges the
sematic mutation
Theory okay I'm going to go through a
series of experiments that were done
over the years that are inconsistent
with the
Dogma this work was done by Dr mckinnel
Who I had the opportunity to talk to at
the University of Minnesota as a
professor ameritus at the University of
Minnesota and he did these studies way
back in 1969 where he had this a very
aggressive renal tumor in the Frog okay
it's a lethal uh malignant tumor it
comes from the kidney and the luck frog
what what uh M Dr mckinnel did is he
took the the cell out of the the tumor
removed the nucleus from the tumor and
put it into a enucleated fertilized egg
that had normal cytoplasm so you take
the cell the nucleus that has the tumor
suppressor genes and the abnormal anle
genes defects and you put it into a new
cytoplasm and he generated this tadpole
all right there was no disregulated cell
growth in the tadpole you could cut the
tail off the tail would grow back and
this this thing the problem is the
tadpole never could mature into a fully
uh differentiated mature frog so there
was something in that cancer nucleus
that blocked development but it
certainly didn't cause the signature met
the signature defect which is this
proliferation
ings are inconsistent with the sematic
mutation Theory and then beatric minz
and Carla meny leaders in the field of
Developmental biology took cancer cells
from a very malignant patoma and put
these whole cells into the blastocyst
and developed a mouse that was a mixture
of the tumor cell origin and and the and
the other origin and the mouse was was
healthy except for a few little uh uh
spots but their but their um uh their
their their conclusion was conversion to
neoplasia does not involve structure
changes in the nuclear genome okay well
what happened to the tumor suppressor
and the enogen right if this is if this
is the case the findings are
inconsistent with the sematic mutation
Theory uh uh Jim Morgan and his group
from St judee's Medical Hospital in in
in Memphis Tennessee uh was studying
melol blastoma it's a a very aggressive
childhood uh brain tumor in the
cerebellum uh they had knocked out a
gene patched and they made these tumors
and they took the nucleus and of the of
the medul blastoma and they and they put
it into an embryonic uh stem cell and
they and they said although magulo
blastoma derived embryos aborted n
exhibited uncontrolled proliferation
resembling tumor Genesis what happened
to the enco jees and these tumor
suppressor genes here's this embryo
again it aborted something is in those
the cancer nucleus that's blocking
development but it's not causing the
signature phenotype which is uh uh
unbridled proliferation they're
inconsistent this is work done by Rudy
Anish at MIT and his group where they
took melanoma uh tumors characterized
genetically the mutations that were in
the melanoma took the nucleus of the
melanoma put it into an embryonic stema
and cloned a mouse from the melanoma
nucleus okay the presence of major
genetic abnormalities in the mice cloned
from the tumor provides unequivocal
genomic evidence that the mice were
cloned from the tumor nucleus where is
the disregulated what uh the mice
aborted okay just like the Frog and and
and just and just like the Meelo
blastoma something in that cancer cell
nucleus that's damaged is a boarding
development but it's not causing the
signature defect according to the Dogma
that you would have expected because the
phenotype comes from the
nucleus now this is a very important
paper by Benny KATU from Baylor College
of Medicine and his uh group there now
Benny decided to look at the trans what
let's not transfer the nucleus let's
transfer the mitochondria so he took
very aggressive breast cancer highly
malignant breast cancer cells and he
replaced the mitochondria in the breast
cancer cells with uh normal mitochondria
non-cancer non-cancerous mitochondria he
characterized the upregulated enogen and
the genetic abnormalities in the breast
cancer from the malignant cells he puts
the mitochondria from the normal and the
enco turn off and their energy
metabolism of the cell and the cells sto
growing and then when he did the reverse
experiment took the the very cancerous
mitochondria and put it into extremely
slow growing tumors these tumors went
went went berserk and R them in the mice
to show
this okay the mitochondria calling the
shots
here now what I did just recently over
the summer I kind of bundled I've only
given you a small snapshot of some of
these papers you have to go and read all
of this for yourselves so what I did in
this paper is I threw out the data and I
said let's interpret the data based on
the the the sematic mutation Theory and
based on the mitochondrial metabolic
Theory and you come to the conclusion of
what you think this is telling us
because if it's not if it's telling us
that this is not a nuclear genetic
disease then we have gone seriously off
track and it's takes time to to to to
look into this so this little diagram
that's circulating through the web that
we my students and I put together to
give us a little picture of what's going
on in a very simplistic way this figure
normal cells beg get normal cells tumor
cells beg get tumor cells what is
responsible for the disregulated
phenotype is it the defects in the
nucleus or is it the defects in in the
cytoplasm in the mitochondria you move
the nucleus to a normal cell and you get
normal cells sometimes normal tissues
but it aborts so there's something going
on with this cancer Gene you do the
reverse experiments which have been done
by Israel and Schaefer and you put a
normal nucleus into a tumor and you get
dead you get either tumor cells or dead
cells you don't get normal cells again
we're seeing evidence that challenges
the Dogma that cancer is a genetic
disease so if somatic mutations are not
the origin of cancer then how do cancer
cells arise big question okay let's
throw off the Dogma oh okay now we're
really we're groping now no we're not
groping warberg had it pegged a long
time
ago okay a very Dynamic uh scientist
from the 20th century he clearly stated
cancer arises from damage to cellular
respiration and we saw this from from Dr
bus's uh presentation yesterday energy
through fermentation gradually comp
compensates for insufficient respiration
cancer cells continue to ferment lactate
in the presence of oxygen which is the
warberg effect Big Field the research in
cancer metabolism what is where does the
warberg effect come from what controls
the warberg everybody's trying to figure
out how the anco enogen do Drive the
warberg effect but why are the ancoin up
because they have defective
respiration warberg also clearly defined
the nature of the warberg effect it's
not a mystery regardless of what I
people say enhanced fermentation now
here that enhan fermentation is the
signature metabolic defect malady in all
these cancer cells to some degree or
another some cancer cells a little bit
of respiration some of a very few
respiration but
nevertheless insufficient respiration is
the common metabolic Mal
malady all right every cell in that
tumor is a different genetic entity they
all have different genetic mutations
every cell in the tumor you colog them
out they're all different from each
other why do we persist on focusing on
the unique differences of every cell in
the tumor looking for the for the
therapy when the common metabolic malady
is is is sitting right there in front of
us why we don't why do we don't do
that why don't we focus on the common
defect rather than the unique defect in
every single cell okay very simplistic
overview of energy metabolism most of
our energy comes from oxidated
phosphorilation in the mitochondria
breathe in the good air exhale exhale
the bad air CO2 goes out from the foods
that we bring in we're respiring or most
of the energy in our body is coming from
oxidated phosphorilation very little
energy comes from substrate level these
are primitive forms of energy substrate
level phosphor relations you get it in
the glycolytic pathway in in the
cytoplasm and also in the kreb cycle the
citric acid cycle you can get some
energy through the sual COA synthes step
in there which can get up regulated in
cancer okay so what happens in the tumor
cells now is there is a shift away from
fos to these more primitive substrate
level phosphor this is seen say to some
degree or
another okay why is there a shift
because if they don't make the shift
they're going to die all right if only
cells that can upregulate substrate
level phosphor relations can tolerate a
loss in O in respiration otherwise the
cells die you're never going to get
cancer so a lot of people say oh there's
nothing wrong with the mitochondrian
tumors well when you look at it under
the electron microscope you see often a
lot of of different kinds of problems
and we and we just heard from John these
are tubes so these are tubes running
through a cisum uh of this organel and
this is the barrel Orthodox shape of the
see these Stripes here these are the
chiste they contain the proteins of the
electron transport chain and this lipid
cardiol lipin of the elect these lipids
and proteins work together and they form
these super complexes to generate the
energy that we need to respire ourselves
and generate the energy for our body
this is a gleo blastoma multiform that
we heard about yesterday and they have a
ghost what they call chryssis leading to
ghost mitochondria structure dictates
function the very structures are missing
to a to a large degree in the in the
mitochondria of the GBM and in in a
mitochondria have a lot of cancers now
they're not all cancers don't look
exactly like this some have massive
numbers of mitochondria but they're all
dysmorphic in one way or another most
cells have very few mitochondria in the
cancer cells but many of them have this
pet Peters at John's Hopkins did a huge
study he never found a tumor cell that
had completely normal numbers of
structures of mitochondria mitochondria
defective if these mitochondri defective
these cells are not going to be able to
respire and in order for them to respire
effectively they're going to have to
they're going to have to go back to some
sort of level of fermentation otherwise
they're going to die there's no other
way you can get
energy we looked at we we we looked at
all this and there's a lot of evidence
to show this now the question is how do
you put all this together if you're
going to come up with a new kind of a
view of cancer you have to be able to
link all of the information that's been
done on this disease and then
reinterpret it in light of a different
kind of a view the mitochondrial
metabolic theory of cancer okay so we
take the emphasis away now from the
nucleus and we put it on the
mitochondria all right and this is the
oncogenic Paradox that has that has
perplexed scientists for decades even in
the book The Emperor of all maladies
sudu muki's book that was on the
bestseller list was you go and read his
book we don't understand how it's
possible that we can have all these
provocative Agents from the environment
causing cancer through a common
pathophysiological mechanism this
challenged Albert sorgi Nobel Prize
winner this challenged John K there a
varic people we don't understand how uh
uh carcinogens radiation hypoxia
inflammation rare inherited mutations
p-53 oh cancer must be a genetic disease
because a person inherited the orberg
said you have many secondary causes of
cancer there's only one one primary
cause that might damage to the
respiration those p-53 mutations that
you inherit in the genome damage the
respiration so does braa one and some of
these others that you hear about Ras
enogen viruses age all of these things
can produce cancer in various tissues
what do they do they produce Ross
reactive oxygen species Ross are known
to be carcinogenic and mutagenic all
right so they're coming out of the
mitochondria and they're causing the
genomic mutations that you see in the
nucleus
they feed back and they cause further
damage on the efficiency of the
respiration the the mitochondria signal
the nucleus if you're going to survive
we have to go to Alternative Energy
what's going to drive the Alternative
Energy the enogen they transcription
factors for the fermentation Pathways so
they're an effect they're not the cause
it's very important to recognize this
because it's extremely important on how
we're going to deal with this disease if
we understand the origin so what happens
then this is a progressive situation
it's a escal ation of biological chaos
eventually leading to these ghost
mitochondria eventually shifting from R
from from oxidative phosphorilation to
substrate level phosphorilation so the
cell now becomes more and more
fermentative during the progression of
the cancer genome is is all shot to hell
it's collecting all these mutations you
get a warberg effect which is the shift
for the fermentation now we can begin to
link this the the Hallmarks of cancer to
defective respiration and this whole
shift from from respiration to
fermentation so that when you damage the
cell's respiration the mitochondria
keeping those cells in a differentiated
State when that mitochondria becomes
dysfunctional the cells begin to ferment
when the cells ferment they begin to
take on the characteristics that
organisms had on the planet before
oxygen came in all right so during that
time when there was no oxygen in the
atmosphere all of the cells were highly
fermentative in a highly reduced State
and proliferated uncontrollably all
right in a in a in a unbridled
proliferation okay if that's the case
you can account for the three major the
first three major concepts of the whole
all of this is the result of these cells
returning to their to primitive State
sustained
angiogenesis vascularization of the
tumor there massive emphasis going on
this the cells are blowing out lactic
acid into the micro environment creating
an acific which is telling the the body
to this is a wound we got to go and heal
this the V the blood vessels come in
it's coming in because of the
destabilized energy metabolism in those
cells they evade apotosis okay what
controls apotosis cytochrom C in the
mitochondria mitochondria being blown
out therefore these cells are escaping
their normal programmed
death now this is the the big dog here
metastas
metastasis all right how do we link how
do we link the metabolic Theory the
mitochondrial metabolic Theory into the
most important aspect of
cancer there is growing
appreciation that the metastatic
cell is a fused hybrid from our immune
system with these tumor cells this is
not well appreciated because it's not
consistent with the epithelium as enal
transition of the Dogma but there's a
growing evidence so we have normal cells
we have a beginning a dysplastic
carcinoma inside two these cells now
begin to throw out a little lactic acid
our macras of the immune cells come in
as facilitators of wound healing and
when the wound doesn't heal and this
chronic condition persists over time to
to facilitate wound healing the macras
is fused
with these cells so in the fusion
process these cells are now picking up
dysfunctional mitochondria from the from
these from these cells that cannot and
can do not
metastasize these cells these this
condition these fused hybrids now that
macrofagos live in the circulation they
enter and exit extravasate intravasate
there are militia in our body to heal uh
bacterial infections help facilitate
wound healing these cells are all
already programmed to do all of the
things in the Met metastasis Cascade you
don't have to have new mutations as a
matter of fact some of the most
metastatic cells have no mutations I
don't know how the Dogma deals with that
the other thing you have to realize that
as a cell of the immune system glutamine
now becomes a major fuel in addition to
glucose our immune cells are glutamine
Hogs that's because of their biology and
what they're programmed to do so it's
very important then to recognize that
what we have done is Unleashed a beast
that is metabolically uh
disregulated so if most cancers Express
the warberg effect as the results of
impaired respir what are the therap okay
now let's look at the therapies okay
once we have a clear a more clear
understanding of the nature and the
biology of what cancer actually is now
we can begin to think about those kinds
of therapies that might be more
effective or uh uh uh better than what
we presently have okay one strategy is
to reduce levels of fermentable fuels
while elevating levels of
non-fermentable fuels if fermentation is
what's keeping those guys alive we need
to recognize that and deprive them of
the fuels that are allowing them to
grow okay so let's look at the
metabolism glucose and glutamine are the
prime fermentable fuels for this cell
these cells are living in hypoxic
environments okay glucose comes in
glucose 6 phosphate can be metabolized
through the m and myof pathway getting
us nice subst lot of substrate lot of
energy through the glycolytic pathway
blowing out lactic acid into the micro
environment also some of the some of the
pyu can enter into the the citric acid
cycle come out as citrate For the
synthesis of lipids using the other part
of the pathway the pentos phosphate
pathway which is upregulating
glutathione keeping these cells from
dying from the Ros this glutathione is
upregulated in these cells they they use
nadph which is also a substrate for
building fatty acids so you're getting
and of course you're building the
precursors for DNA synthesis so these
cells can proliferate using glucose as
the substrate on the other side you get
glutamine coming in Split by the
glutaminase the amid nitrogen is now
coming in and now forming the two major
nitrogen and carbons are going to make
the DNA and the RNA and all this the
proliferation the a glutamate can be
dump back out into the out outside which
in the brain is deadly because it's
going to create cytotoxic death and and
necrosis and it's going to facilitate
rapid growth or the glutamate can be
transaminated to alphaet glutarate using
either the the uh red Ive pathway or the
oxidative pathway either one to generate
more substrates for the growth of the
cell so glutamine and glucose now if and
as Angela's going to talk about if you
shut down the glucose and you starve
them of this and then you give them a
hyperbaric oxygen you could potentially
overwhelm their antioxidant capacity and
kill them naturally by upregulating U
reactive oxygen species and the ketones
from the ketogenic diets will protect
normal cells from this from this attack
so this is the thing everybody's always
okay we got to drug that's going to kill
tumor cells and not hurt so far that
drug doesn't exist but it
can okay calorie restriction metabolic
cancer intervention we've heard about
this total dietary restriction differs
from starvation in the fact that it
maintains minerals and nutrients
enhances mitochondrial biogenesis some
of these cancer cells that might be on
the threshold could potentially be
returned to the Society of cells if you
could re reactivate their mitochondria
not poisoning uh uh individuals to
reactivate that mitoch Andria all right
so we have reduced now if we go into
calorie restriction blood sugar goes
down insulin goes down glucagon turns on
we heard about this yesterday okay we
start mobilizing fats water soluble
break down fat products bah hydroxy
butter acetone blows out in the breath
okay so we begin to shift the whole
metabolic environment by doing calorie
restriction now let's look at some of
the data from some of our now this is a
study we did using the zler brothers
zero carbohydrate ketogenic diet
uh standard diet ketogenic diet
unrestricted let the mice eat all they
want and restricted calorie restricted
to reduce body weight by about
15% now look at this standard diet
unrestricted tumors grow fast you
restrict the Cal the high carbohydrate
diet the tumors grow slow you now here
the ketogenic diet unrestricted makes
the tumors grow even faster the
ketogenic diet you have to know how to
use this a met it's a tool if you don't
know how to use it you get you have
problems you restrict the diet yes you
get this now we saw the same effects
using nutritious keto Cal the same same
exact findings from the from but I want
to say not all these ketogenic diets are
the same all right some some you can eat
ad libitum I'll show you data for that
where you don't you don't get
necessarily something like this so
there's some differences here and also
some of the tumors respond differently
that's another thing what we did each
one of these mice are a under a
different diet condition and we use
linear regression analysis as glucose
goes down ketones go up an
evolutionarily conserved adaptation as
glucose goes down tumor weight goes down
and we heard that yesterday from Dr bus
there's a direct correlation in the
blood between how fast your tumor grows
and how much blood sugar you have and
that's we showed this in the mouse and
now it's been shown for breast cancer
and for brain cancer and for a variety
of other things now what are the
mechanism people love to know the
mechanism I'm not going to have time to
go through all of our massive amounts of
data but uh calorie restriction targets
multiple cancer hallm marks it
downregulates the vas vascular
endothelial growth factor expression for
angiogenesis it operates through the NF
capab pathway downregulating uh those
signaling Cascades it's proapototic it's
killing the tumor cells by an aptic
mechanism so now we've done the
mechanisms in the mice and we've done a
lot of work like this um of course uh we
want to look at brain cancer we've done
a lot of work on brain cancer we've
developed a very excellent model for
human gleo blastoma um and this GBM
model it fulfills all of the
characteristics that you see in human
GBM uh this is one of our first slide
studies on just calorie restriction
Alone um here's the brain you put the
these the Dark Cells here these are the
tumor cells and as Dr boss said
yesterday these cells invade right we
these cells you put the cells here
they'll invade right across the Corpus
colossum they'll go to the brain stem
they'll go to the cerebellum these cells
are all out through the brain there's no
way you're going to be able to
surgically reect or debulk this however
we put the mice on calorie restriction
and you can see that the uh demarcation
of the tumor becomes much sharper under
calorie restriction and as Dr boss said
yest today we know that if you the more
you can debulk on a cancer patient the
greater the longer that person is going
to live if so I say why why you know
when a person has the brain tumor they
go in we got to get the brain tumor out
right away why don't you put them on a
calorie restricted ketogenic diet shrink
the tumor and then take the tumor out
and you're going to you're going to
guarantee that the patient's going to
live longer for some of for some reason
soon as the poor patient gets dying oh
we got to take that tumor out right away
it's just like what the poor gu doesn't
even know what's going on you know nor
does the neurosurgeon most of the time
except for the ones at at up
pit Joe maroon all right can the
ketogenic diet be effective the
metabolic management of of brain cancer
and
people okay the first study was done by
Linda nebling uh she took two little
kids that were failing the standard of
care and uh they were not responding and
she put them on the ketogenic diet low
uh reduced blood sugar elevated ketones
and they had a remarkable recovery the
quality of life of those kids improved
significantly now the way you're going
to see I want I cannot emphasize more
get her PhD dissertation from the the
library at Case Western and read how she
dealt with this incredible challenge
when you read what what happened to
those little kids it breaks your heart
what what those kids went through and to
see how they recovered and their quality
of life improved with this ketogenic
diet one kid lived another coule couple
years the other one was lost to followup
we they we we tried to figure it out we
just they couldn't figure out maybe
maybe the child is still alive that we
don't know but it was lost to followup
now what I don't understand is this was
shown back in
95 it it works why are we not using this
in pediatric oncology you know we have
some of the greatest Minds here using
the same therapy for epilepsy children
in EP with epilepsy are being treated
with these ketogenic diets but little
kids with brain tumor or
not what is going on with
that okay we published the second paper
uh as you saw yesterday um in nutrition
and Metabolism from this individual that
was 65 years old and she had a memory
loss and you saw the data I'm not going
to show you again but Dr boss showed it
yesterday the tumor was shrunk MRI pet
scans everybody was quite excited called
radiological resolution doesn't happen
often it can happen occasionally on
standard of care but it doesn't happen
often that were we got several more
positive signs that the individual
thought they were out of the woods they
went back uh off the diet the tumor
returned okay and rather than going back
on the diet they went on
aason all right I've written about
avastin worst damn drug it was taken off
the market for breast cancer why are we
still using it for brain cancer it
causes the cells to diffuse through the
brain you're never going to this is oh
because the images look a little bit
better okay and you saw this we
published this in Lan oncology
originally and this is the standard of
care we're not going to make any major
advances until we get rid of that
standard of
care I don't care what anybody says you
create a perfect storm of metabolic
abnormalities in the brain you saw it
yesterday we're releasing glutamine in
large quantities into the brain we're
trying to Stam it by using highd does
dexamethasone this is increasing glucose
many of these brain tumors are infected
with human a megala virus this is like a
supercharger for using glucose and
glutamine all right so we got a big
problem here and there's micoplasma in
those tumors not all but some we got all
this crap in there and we're freeing up
the fuels that are going to keep those
cells alive and and and and save them
and and facilitate their growth now
let's look at the how it works stops
this is the standard of
care radiation alone none of the people
survived they all died now Timol was
considered the Breakthrough I was at the
meeting when timide would say oh this is
the this is the this is the we getting
we're we're increasing progression-free
Survival by a significant amount if we
combine timis olomide with radiotherapy
then a paper comes out timis olomide
increases driver mutations this was out
from Dr Johnson's group at UCSF what's
going on how are you taking Taz olamide
which is helping the patients live a
little bit long progression free and at
the same
time they're they're they're they're
getting driver mutations what's going on
that doesn't how do you how do you
explain this on the Dogma okay what are
the adverse effects of pomide diarrhea
fatigue naisy and vomiting in some
patients those are all indirect forms of
calorie restriction now what would
happen if we replace teide with a
calorie restricted ketogenic diet
something like uh Adrien Sheek is doing
do you think we could get a better a
better if we're combining a radiation
with a restricted ketogenic diet there's
evidence to say that's true what happens
if we get R get rid of radiation
altoe God
forbid the hospitals will lose their
money all right I'm going to give you an
update on an individual that we've been
working with uh for several years now
this person presented with gate
disturbance at age
56 uh they were given her flippers to
improve her swimming and you know ex
biking and all this kind of stuff didn't
go away she was dag tumor inoperable
diffuse infiltrative brain stem
CA uh in 2012 she initiated a restricted
ketogenic diet with supplements
metformin dichloroacetate and kumin she
had to get off the DCA after a while
because it was causing some peripheral
peripheral neuropathy conditions she
would uh went to see five major medical
hospitals in Europe and the United
States uh refused recommended chemo and
radiotherapy from five major medical
centers so she's not on any standard of
care except the ketogenic diet and
supplements I talked to her last week
the tumor the tumor can MRI says the
tumor is not going away it grows very
very slowly it's still there but she
still drives her car she's in relatively
good health but she's
depressed I told her stop getting the
MRIs every time you get the MRI you get
depressed all right she's already out
she's six years out you know um this
diffuse and if you have little children
have is devastating they die very
quickly unfortunately but if you're in
mid years you can live maybe 10 or or or
or or 15 uh years with kind of a tumor
but then it gets bad again when you get
o over age 55 you in the literature we
know she's out now almost six years
going on seven years uh with this tumor
and as we know of only one other person
at least presented in the L literature
at least that we know of that lived to
nine years so she's out in the
stratosphere of survival without any
standard of
care now we try to we learned a lot from
this one case and you know we're trying
to uh uh uh Elevate ketones and reduce
glucose but each one of these is the the
meas the measurements every day
measuring glucose and ketones over
months so we have hundreds and hundreds
of measurements of glucose and keton in
this one person now the problem of
course is that you see a lot of scatter
we're trying to develop a a a a a a
procedure that can be used in clinical
trials and things like this and my
students and I are looking at the data
and we're going man this is going to be
tough to do in a clinical how these
people and then you know she uh she goes
out and gets into she has a handicapped
parking spot she goes in some some guy
parked in her hand AP parking spot and
the next thing you know she has a big
her blood sugar and I think Colin champ
went on the web showing how how
emotional stress and all these things
can do this All right so we developed
the glucose Ketone index as a as a as a
biomarker to help uh uh evaluate this
you get the ratios and we replotted her
data and now it looks much more more
much more stable and we think this is
going to be an effective way to do this
I also want to say that um uh we're
going to try to validate in in our GBM
model and the GB M people say it doesn't
metast that's true it doesn't rarely
come out of the brain but if you take
those cells and humans if human cells
can get outside the brain they spread
through the whole the whole Mouse just
like this so this is this GBM outside
the brain and it's been reported and we
have uh so we we can bioluminescent the
tumor cells you can see the liver full
of cancer uh spleen as well so what we
did this is our new unpublished study um
look at how beautiful the body weights
are now this is a ketogenic diet ketogen
that uh the mice do lose weight a little
after a while so it's the one that
Dominic and Angel we all use we keep the
body weights really tight standard
unrestricted restricted ketogenic diet
unrestricted glucose is high in the
unrestricted groups and low in the
restricted groups look how high the
ketones go when you restrict the
ketogenic diet if you can get those
ketones up they'll be toxic to the tumor
cells sure they go up if you eat
ketogenic diet all but they but they
won't go up as high unless you're
restrict and the gki is the lowest and
here's the results now uh you can see
that um standard diet restricted had no
effect in this tumor in this tumor
because we think it's using glutamine
and now ketogenic diet restricted had
the best effect and the unrestricted
replicates what Dominic and Angela found
yes there is some effect but the best
effect is when you restricted diet the
important thing is the blood sugar here
and here is the same but the therapeutic
benefit is much greater in the
restricted
diet we did a linear regression analysis
as uh as the glucose Ketone index goes
down survival of the mice goes up so it
validates that this gki could be
effective we also know that 25% of brain
cancer patients die from metastasis to
the brain the restricted diet
significantly reduces metastasis to the
brain the problem is that uh these tumor
cells are mutated um these these mutated
tumor cells will not be able to adjust
to Rapid shifts in dietary conditions
calor restricted diets and restricted
raw vegan diets one or the other putting
on the press the pulse are Dr Dr
hyperbaric oxygen procedures non-toxic
drug targeting for glucose and glutamine
most of what we're talking about so far
is targeting glucose and elevating
ketones with the hope that we're going
to stop this disease we got to hit that
glutamine if we don't take care of the
glutamine we're not going to be
completely successful and this is a
problem it's so much more difficult to
Target glutamine than it is to Target
glucose
conclusions cancer is more of a
mitochondrial metabolic disease than it
is a nuclear genetic disease and until
this becomes more widely known and
recognized we're going to be we're going
to see those numbers go up the body
count is going to go up pre-clinical and
case report studies indicate that
restricted diets can be effective
non-toxic metabolic therapy for managing
malignant cancers in children and adults
the gki index can predict the success of
a metabol of metabolic therapy for
cancer I'd like to thank all of my many
collaborators um that are here Angela
and Dominic and Joe maroon and Jeff boss
replaced him on this on the schedule
that the funding agent
my own re my own institution uh George U
Foundation who's very interested in this
Travis Christopherson single cause
single cure fund foundation so these are
the small organizations that are helping
us continue to do this because I am I am
convinced that we will be successful in
managing cancer without toxicity thank
you for your attention
thank
you thank you
thank you very much thank you I
appreciate
that any questions yes Susan yeah so I
think I'll um bring this up publicly so
a good friend of mine has BL over right
now that has recurred and after I found
out that she had it I told you I flew
out to Colorado I brought her your book
I brought her a bunch of materials I
highlighted the important things I gave
her a little simple instruction manual
but of course she was doing well she had
just had a tumor removed
and anyway so I said well you may need
this at some point well just last week
um I thought of that she had to have
another surgery because the tumor has
recurred Etc um and so one question I
have is do you know if it's at all
possible that she could survive this at
this point now that the T tumor has
recurred they did in intraoperative
genetic testing of the cell and of
course they're infiltrated Etc I mean I
don't think there's any hope but I'm
just wondering if you know well you know
hope um we never say there's no hope
right um we know people who have gone
who had Advanced cancers who went on
this we we uh we don't cure uh but we
give a higher quality of life I would
say not we the the the metabolic therapy
if done correctly can give people a
longer period of time at a higher
quality of life I don't think it's
possible to stop this tumor at that
stage
with with a with a ketogenic diet alone
uh if they're going to do hyperbaric
oxygen you have to have that uh that
that that has to be in a in a high
ketosis State it's a little risky
because it but it can work um at this
Advanced stage Andrew uh um Scarboro is
showing it we have other people that are
showing it I think Mindy Elwell had some
very good success with this um there's
always hope uh we're not saying we can
cure but we can certainly delay until we
can knock out that glutamine uh I don't
think going to be able to cure this
disease but if we had a drug which we
don't yet have that could work I think
the The Hope and the prognosis would be
much
better okay thank you so my main point
for bringing this up publicly is I've
had a lot of success in my community
with various Community activism and they
often start with petitions so what I'm
planning on doing is writing now a
letter to all of her doctors I'll
provide a copy of it maybe someplace at
the dinner tonight and I'm thinking
whoever wants to could sign it maybe
supporting her trying this um ketogenic
diet maybe in combination with hyperic
oxygen at least as an adant to to
whatever they're going to try and put
her in on now the problem is with cancer
because there's millions of things
there's always some new drug and it
seems like the doctors are always LED
Along by the promise of some new drug
that came out last month and maybe
provides a different alternative but I
don't see you know Susan
the person themselves that individual
has to make this decision okay that that
person okay and that's the way it's
going to change yeah I know because you
know sometimes we do all we can and if
the person is not there it it just it
just that there's a commitment there has
to be an understanding these are very
difficult everyone is a unique case you
know the family has to be involved
because the whole family has to
participate they're all misguided
they're what they're misguided well
they're misguided um and there's an
Institutional barrier to this so this a
tough this is a very tough situation
right well I just feel like the
information and I've done all I can I
think you
have Tom outstanding talk as always uh
you've been arguing against the angleene
Dogma for years uh very effectively has
there been a response from the gorilla
in the room the unle
so I mean either publicly when you given
a talk at a conference or in the
literature you know the um have you ever
been to Nico Japan no the monkeys hear
no evil speak no evil see no evil that's
what you get you've been ignored is that
what you're saying there's been
absolutely no response whatsoever well
there's there's behind the door response
all right that that uh we we know about
yeah maybe Travis can tell you about the
behind the door response on this but you
know you're threatening a a whole
establishment here I mean let's be
honest you know uh what what do you
think they're all going to run out in
the streets and say Hey you let's drop
our our new opdo on our commercial
putting it on the wall of the Sears
trade the Sears building in Chicago I
mean this is these this is a big problem
but I'll tell you there's ways to get
around it with with global budgeting uh
there's a financial incentive to do some
of this under the Obamacare or some
derivation of that um that might for in
fact the the Democratic uh the the poor
Democrat who doesn't get anything from
from Baltimore there I saw him on the
debate the other day I don't know what
even know what his name is he's always
behind the other two you know but he
actually he actually said we're using
this kind of a therapy or this kind of a
of a strategy and I found that whoa
maybe we should look at that guy a
little a little more I what's his name
there the guy from Balon Omi yes maybe
we should take another look at him Mr
Ali
okay um I'm from from you so um have you
talk about metab birth water being an
important part of this story because um
to my uh reading this U the the the main
function the primary function of my is
to prod water now what we do what it
does with the water we it can keep
Contin like Mal to produce
ATP or without drinking water supply and
just Supply the body water and that's
how animals survive in the desert and of
your excellent uh approach I would just
like to hear what I you know I think
it's an extremely important issue it may
work coralily with the diet I haven't
tried it I would love to try it these
are some of the things that if we had
the money we could do you got we you
know that's the problem and as Adrien
and I have no is it easy to get money
for this Adrian oh he's a gay yeah
I'm taking my private jet
[Laughter]
home you know that's the
situation just uh very nice talk as
usual uh one quick comment we do have an
IRB approved clinical trial using the
kenic diet up front and the way we got
that our physicians are are pretty good
I sit on t board and they were not
willing to go clinical trial based on
our pre of until two patients and you
mentioned one of them in BL uh said they
wanted to go on the diet based on
Publications they had seen intelligent
families went out and stuff um and they
did so well that the clinicians in our
Institute went well maybe we should do a
tri and that's how the clinical Tri got
done exactly the same thing happened in
epilepsy it wasn't the Physicians that
pushed it it was the patients and the
patient parents and the cas of the kids
that pushed it so I think that that's
where really the power is thanks to the
epilepsy Community we know that the
ketogenic th is very safe so our
position say well it's not going to hurt
you help it's not going to hurt you so
yeah sure you know whatever and then
they did really well so it really is the
patients that are going to push this and
the clinical trials that are going to
give um scientifically vetted data so
that more I agree and I want to thank
you for the work that you've done at
that at the barrows because you've been
an instrumental force in in in pushing
this forward thank you talk me
that's um Adrien Sheek
Barrow yeah Barrow neurological Center
in in Phoenix
Arizona um thank you very much for the
very provactive uh talk um I had an AA 2
well
aa3 an anaplastic asosa and I find that
there's a lot of information about how
to manage GL Loma through your work and
other
uh but there's not very much discussion
about aa2 or
aa3 uh you know information so uh from
the information that you just presented
uh is there a significant difference in
how you would manage an A2 or an aa3 to
prevent recurrence or more
proliferation um no I I think we would
use the same strategy uh basically um
the those have you have a lot more to
play play around time uh the the tumors
grow much slower so so the issue is can
you make them grow even slower and if
you can get them even to a slower growth
can we move in with hyperbaric oxygen
and certain drugs that will work
synergistically with the diet to kind of
Polish those those cells off so you know
um that's my strategy that's what I
would do but as I want to say this is an
ex we're in a very infant stage of this
procedure we're at the very beginning of
this new phase of of of managing cancer
and there's things that we don't yet no
and we learn a lot from just single
patients and how they respond and the
data that we get back from them so but
but you can we can definitely I think I
don't want to say for sure we don't know
anything until we till we actually get
the data but we can slow those tumor
cells down and then we would work
through a a strategy to keep them under
control perhaps we can spend a little
bit of time outside of one of our two
patients had an incomplete reected grade
three tumor and because completely
reected the clinicians expected it to
continue
and she's one of the two that came
aition mind because the KD held it B so
well it was a great okay sorry just I'll
make a uh a statement about my own
conditions but uh I gone through
standard of care and I found out about
the ketogenic diet during the follow on
chemo and when I went through follow on
chemo I actually saw a reduction in my
brain tumor size to the point now where
it's not perceivable on the scans
obviously have a messed up
brain uh you also discussed the vaston
uh I have a very good friend who has a
GBM he's a 5year
Survivor uh he had two recurrences of
his brain tumor in very quick order uh
after finding the ketogenic diet uh he
actually had a a reduction of his tumor
size and it's and basically uh not
detectable on scans and that's a g GBM
to your current Survivor so it it really
does have a profound back yeah well we
want to make sure it works better know
that that's that's this is the good
first step but the idea is can we can
can you come back in 25 years and say
you know one time when I was a young man
I had this tumor you know I certainly
[Laughter]
agree office yeah very hard as a patient
approach to this therapy because people
actively discourage it um you know even
though it is unlikely to harm you right
right well good luck to you and you and
thank you for sharing that with
us thanks for your talk I really
appreciate it my question is about the
calorie restricted component here to me
anyway you showed very dramatic
difference between the ketogenic and the
ketogenic restricted diet how do you
measure that how is it estimated
implemented all the details but do you
do you know
75% metabolic index or yeah no we we had
to struggle with that for a long time uh
basing it on because Cal we just heard
about the calories last night about
their different metabolic effects we use
body weight body weight is the is the uh
independent variable we we restrict both
groups whe regardless of what they're
eating we make sure that they have
exactly the same body weights and that
gives us a clear indication of what's of
what's working or not
so it's we use it because the B the body
is the bomb calimer the body tells you
what you're going to burn and the and
the mice have a regulated uh body weight
so if and that's how we learned if you
calorie restrict the ketogenic diet
based on on on on calories and you give
the same amount of isocaloric the body
weights are very different they're
eating isocaloric diets but their body
weights are different what's going on
with that we know we've heard all this
this this so you make sure they have the
same body weight and then you can vary
see which one is working so we use body
weight this
great we have two I approv protocols for
GBM uh one for terminal gbn for currents
and one
for uh and I'd like to comment on the
curve restriction our protocols for 1600
Cur restriction I think that uh in the
case that he published Dr his mother the
Restriction was is maybe 700 a day uh
which I think is not sustainable uh we
made it 1600 which is sustainable and we
have found that that it does lead to
weight loss but it is a clinical problem
in patients who are not overweight obes
St because they do lose weight and they
do find that they and their families and
their Physicians climate to have the
color is increased uh so you're
absolutely right the the that's why we
have to manage this disease quickly
all right these diets are not they're
very hard to sustain into years so we we
have to do this weight loss will always
this is a weight loss di me we have all
these guys out here telling us about all
this stuff I mean you're losing weight
uh there a therapeutic weight loss but
we have but we don't like uh Trudy there
she had to get off the diet to regain
the weight all right but you can shift
from one kind of a diet to the other
kind of a diet to try to maintain the
weight and you're absolutely right when
we did the published paper we didn't
know all right we were based on a
powerful calary restriction but you're
absolutely right you can get the same
results with much less calorie
restriction as long as you can keep the
ketones as high as you can get them all
right so you're absolutely right this is
why we have to fine-tune the
system the other comment is that uh
regards the uh Recruitment and uh
perception of the diet uh we get lots of
inquiries and very little
recruitment uh few manys are interested
few sign on uh and part of that is the
fact that their decision making is not
being supported by their oncologists and
surgeons uh you know it's not that
they're not being the surgeons and their
they're not trained this P they don't
get this training in their medical
education okay you're taking a somebody
who's been trained highly highly skilled
professional and they never heard of
this stuff what's going on with the
training program there right why are
they not getting that as a major course
instead of Lear about how how temis
alomide is going to uh be used or one of
these other drugs so that has to
change okay who writes the curriculum
for the medical
schools okay who's doing that figure out
what okay let's change the curriculum we
do it at the University all the time the
Core Curriculum is always changing based
on what's going on in the world you you
see he asked for an honor course
on metabolism
andic disase I sent an yeah maybe that's
needed
more you will be
invited got to make sure where I'm going
you know
[Laughter]
[Applause]